Let's turn our attention next
to the array list dot to array method.
It's highly likely that you'll see
this method in an exam question.
We've looked at it previously in the array section,
but let's put it through its paces here.
So this table shows the three scenarios that occur
when calling the array list dot to array method.
Calling the method with no parameter,
calling the method with a parameter
that is an array larger than or equal to the list size.
And thirdly, calling the method with a parameter
that is an array smaller than the list size.
So the first case with no parameter, there is always
gonna be an array of objects returned with elements.
The results, the same for a raw array list
and a generic array list and object array
returned whose size is a list dot size.
Next, where the parameter input has
an array length greater than or equal to the element size
and the past array limits are not null.
Result equals the parameter array,
elements at index less than list dot size
get populated with the list's elements.
The element at index is equal to list size is set to null.
And elements at index greater than list dot size
remain the same as they were when
they were passed to the method.
If the array list is raw, you must cast it to
a typed array if assigning output to a variable.
And in the third scenario where the parameter
array length is less than element size,
the result, array returned is the set of values in the list
and the type of the parameter passed
an array store exception occurs
if the type of the array of the parameter
isn't compatible with the element type in the list.
All right, so let's explore these scenarios in some code.
We need to create a new class here.
We're going to call this one ToArrayExamples.
Right, so there's our code.
Looking at the code there, we're testing
two types of array lists here.
We've got a raw type array list
and a generics array list type to integer.
Both array lists are populated with integer elements.
You can see it says setting up
our integer array there as well.
So we're studying the results of the toArray method
to a local variable type inference, variable var.
We're doing that for the generics array
on line 38 and then further on down,
we're doing the same thing on line 57.
And what we're also doing with both arrays is,
we're putting the type of object,
the type of array returned from the method,
as well as putting the array elements.
So line 46 and line 64, the other thing
we're doing is we're retrieving an element
from the returned array and testing
whether casting is required to do that.
So let's actually run the code.
All right, and there's the output.
So you can see for scenario one,
the parameter again, was a reference variable for an array
of integer elements with the elements all being null.
So what have we learned in this scenario?
Well, firstly, both lists returned the array
that was passed but changed its elements.
Copying elements from the list to the array.
Using the raw array list and assigning the result
of the method to var required us to cast it.
That's when retrieving a single
element from the returned array.
So we've got a scenario, the scenario there,
recasting it to an int on line 64.
And up here on line 46 with the
generics array list, we didn't need to do that.
Right, so that's one test, let's try another one.
We're going to add some code after this.
Right down here at the bottom of this first chunk of code.
Okay, so there's the code.
So this is scenario two now.
This code that I've pasted in is very similar
to the previous code segment with the following changes.
Firstly, the parameter array that we're passing
has values for all of its elements.
And you can see that we're setting that up there.
On line 76 we're not using local variable type inference.
Instead, what we're using is an integer array
variable references to assign the result of the best code
and you can see the math code's
line 77 and down here also on line 96.
Now we don't need to cast to integer array
for the array list of integer objects, the generics one.
But we do need to do that on line 96 for the
raw array lists and when we access individual elements,
no casting was required in either instance.
And you can see the example there on line 85
and also the example on line 103.
Let's run the code.
So does anything look weird in that output
that you can see at the bottom of the screen?
What's with the null element in each array.
I did allude to that when we were
looking at the slides earlier in the video.
This is a feature of the two array method.
It sets the element that is at the index
list dot size to null, to inform the consumer
where the copied element's boundary is.
All right, so keep that in mind.
All right, let's look at another scenario now.
We're going to post some more code in.
All right, so there's scenario three, the method to array.
This is where we're actually not passing a parameter
and it populates a newly instance object array
with the lists elements, which happen to be all integer.
The behaviour is the same for both
a raw list and a generics list.
Now the thing I want you to look at
firstly is the code on line 113.
'Cause what I want to do initially,
I want to code that out, I want
to put some other code in here.
And looking at the comments from the code
that are posted on line 113, it appears to be wrong
because you can see there that the code compiles.
We've got no errors, but if I run this,
in fact get a class cast exception on that line.
So I've got to undo that change
and go back to the original pasted code,
which was an object array.
If we run this, we find that it does work this time.
So what did we learn with this code segment?
Well, firstly, it doesn't matter
what type of array list you use
when executing to array with no parameter.
The result will always be an object array
and casting will be required when you want to access
its individual elements for that reason.
And the elements are the elements copied from the list.
So I can see looking at the code there.
Obviously we're using casting in both scenarios.
I'm gonna finish the video here, hang in there,
we have actually got a few more examples.
We're getting close to the end of this now.
I'll see you in the next video.